Welcome back. Were you out
there picking up junk again?
I can tell it's cold
just by touching you.
I'm so sorry I can't do
anything to help.
Oh... are you leaving?
No, I want you
to stay here with me.
Please... please
don't leave me alone.
I know it's hard,
but I have to go.
If we want to stay together,
it's the only choice.
Please... try to be strong.
["I"]:
I know time is running out.
[Nagisa]: Tomoya,
do you have everything you need?
[Tomoya]: Yeah, I'm good.
[Nagisa]: Let's say goodbye to
Daddy, Ushio.
All right, I'll see you later.
Have a safe day at work.
We'll see you when you get back!
[Tomoya]: Sanae stays with
Nagisa during the day.
The Old Man stops by a lot, too.
I'm sure they're
as nervous as I am,
but we're doing
everything we can make sure.
Nagisa has a safe delivery.
[Sanae]: Good night, Nagisa.
See you tomorrow.
[Nagisa]: Okay,
see you tomorrow, Mom.
You know, Sanae... sometimes
I think you must hate me
for what I've done. I sure
wouldn't blame you, at least.
I was just thinking that
if Nagisa hadn't met me
in the first place, she
wouldn't be going through such
a risky pregnancy right now.
For better or for worse,
I changed her life.
[Tomoya]: When I first met
her, she seemed so frail.
I feel like if I hadn't
called out to her that day,
she would've stood at the
bottom of that hill forever...
she never wouldn't
taken the first step
into the life she lives now.
I dunno, maybe I'm being
conceited about this.
But I always felt
that she had gotten stronger
because she met me...
and I had gotten stronger
because of her, too.
That's exactly
what happened, Tomoya.
You have no idea
how much Akio and I
appreciate the things
you've done for Nagisa.
That's fine and all, but I'm
starting to have my doubts.
If I weren't here, then she'd
probably still be living at home
with you guys.
She might not have
as many friends,
but I think she'd still
be happy in her own way.
Or maybe she would've met
someone who's actually
worth something... and she'd
be better off than she is now.
That's hardly fair, Tomoya.
I can't even imagine that.
I had a feeling you'd say that.
It's nice of you, but you
don't have to humor me.
I don't know...
That's how I honestly feel.
I'm sorry I brought this up.
I guess... I just needed
to vent a little.
["I"]: I kept working@without
a moment of rest.
I needed a machine
that could fly.
@I needed to build a machine
that could take us away
from this dying world.
[Nagisa]: Christmas is right
around the corner, huh?
Yeah, and that means it's
about to be your birthday, too.
What do you want this year?
Another Dango Family plushie.
I already gave you one of those,
what would you do
with another one?
[Tomoya]: Besides, I don't
think they sell them anymore.
You're saying it'd
be hard to get one?
[Tomoya]: More like impossible.
"Impossible," huh?
[Akio]: Well, I'll be damned,
I can't believe you found one!
Yeah, I'm lucky Tomoya went
through so much trouble
to get one for me!
[Sanae]: Now you've
started a tradition!
You're going to have to buy
one for her every year.
Then you'll really have a
Big Dango Family someday!
I dunno; Her older ones might
get jealous if we do that.
But it's kind of a shame;
I can't hold all three
at the same time.
You think you could you
do it for me, Tomoya;
Just on your lap.
Huh? Me?
[Sanae]: Who else?
@Here you go.
Oh, that's perfect!;
You look so cute!
[giggles]
[Tomoya]: They smell like
Nagisa. That's nice...
Yo! Long time no see!
Remind me, who are you again?
That wasn't funny last
April and it's not funny now!
Hi Sunohara, glad
you could make it!
Oh, and happy
New Year, by the way.
Oh! Good to see you Nagisa!
Eh?
[Sunohara]: WHOA!
Oh, wow, you're totally huge...!
It's a little
embarrassing, actually.
It's all like,
magic or something...
Now that's enough of that!
I see you're as crude
and insensitive as ever!
You move off and get a job,
but you still act
the same as always!
@No offense, but that's like
theúpot calling the kettle
black.
[Tomoya]: Kyou! Fujibayashi!
Glad you guys could come.
@It's like a high school
reunion! Happy New Year!
@[Kotomi]ÚI'm here!
I just made it back
from America.
How are you?
I feel like it's been ages
since I've seen any of you guys!
We're doing great! I'm happy
you could make the trip, Kotomi!
[gasps]
You sure are big, Nagisa!
Yep.
Can I touch your tummy?
Yeah, of course you can!
I don't know what, but there's
something so wonderful about it.
Ooh! Me next!
Would you give
it a rest for once?
No fair!
[Sunohara]:
C'mon! Lemme touch it! Please?!
@So this card's
fromúTomoyo's family, huh?
Yeah, it seems like her
brother's doing well, too.
This one's from Miyazawa.
Looks like all of her friends
are finally getting along!
Okay, one last card,
úfrom Nishina and Sugisaka.
@It says We miss you at work
andúhope you have a healthy
baby.
Almost forgot.
@Here you go; Give this to
Meiúwhen you go back home.
What is it?
@It's Yoshino'súbrand
new single.
@He's starting up againúon
an indie record label.
That's weird. It's called
Love and Spaniel?
[Kotomi]: Actually,
I think it's Love and Spanner.
Did they really let you
graduate from high school?
Still, that's a
strange song title.
Yeah, Yoshino and I came up
with it one day at work.
That was actually one of the
better ones, believe it or not.
Hey, Okazaki...
What's up? What is it?
[Kyou]: They're both Okazaki
now, dummy.
Okay... Dude Okazaki.
["Dude Okazaki"]: What?
Just call me Tomoya!
You're about to be a dad, right?
How does it feel?
That's a strange
question to ask.
Actually, I'm curious, too.
@What's it like
knowingúthat you're about
@to start yourúown family?
[Sunohara]: It's weird.
I always imagined
me and my friends
having kids way in the future.
[Sunohara]: So when I heard that
you two were gonna be parents,
it felt like I was supposed to
be an adult all of a sudden...
or like I missed
the bus on something.
I dunno... I probably shouldn't
say this in front of you,
but I don't think most guys
choose to become a father.
It's more like
a natural disaster...
like an earthquake,
or getting hit by lightning.
That's why I wanted to know
how you feel about it
happening to you.
What's going through your head?
I dunno. Can't really say!
@What, that's it?
I'm not trying to avoid the
question, it just feels like
it hasn't quite sunk in yet.
I was just working my hardest
and living for the woman
I love... then it happened.
[Tomoya]: That's it.
@[laughing] Y'know, actually,
úthat's a big relief!
After all this time,
you haven't changed a bit!
You think so?
Of course. When I heard
you guys were having a baby,
I felt like you'd totally
drifted away from me.
But no, you're right
where I left you.
I'm happy to see it.
I know what you mean.
To tell you the truth,
I was a little nervous
about coming to see
you guys today.
I feel like you two rushed
so far ahead in life
that you left us all behind.
Life really is
mysterious, isn't it?
Where does it come from
and where does it go?
That reminds me of the stuff
I was studying back in America;
I'm trying to continue
my parents' research.
@It was something about a
hiddenúworld... isn't that
right?
Uh-huh.
We're studying another world
parallel to ours.
Unfortunately, it's been sort of
difficult to make much progress,
since we can neither
see nor feel it.
But you know...
we're learning more every day
and it seems like it's a lot
closer than we thought.
[Ryou]: Really?
Yeah. It's probably related
to extra dimensions
that we haven't discovered yet.
According to M-theory,
all matter we know of
consists of a series
of strings that exist
in both our dimension
and higher dimensions.
That means that these strings
may or may not be visible
in a 3-dimensional space.
It's also believed
that some forces,
such as gravitational energy
can transcend the
four-dimensional space-time.
Ugh. Whoa, slow down!
Could you dumb that down
for the rest of us?
I thought I was
already explaining it
in the dumbest way possible.
[Tomoya]: Anyway... Crazy
science talk aside, the point
here is
that our world
and the hidden world
are connected in
some way, right?
That's right!
Things like time and space
or even human consciousness
can interact in ways that
change things in both worlds
and create new ones, too.
So what I mean, is that the
two worlds could be influencing
each other in ways
that we don't understand yet.
Does it make more sense now?
[Ryou]: So, even if we
can't see the hidden world,
it's still affecting
our lives in some way?
Well, I don't want
to jump to any conclusions,
but that's a
definite possibility.
[Kotomi]: After all, this world
is full of things that we don't
understand.
I wonder what kind of place
the hidden world is?
[Nagisa]: Is it like our
world, or different?
[Tomoya]: Nagisa's play... why
did I remember that all of a
sudden?
The girl in the world
that had ended...
how did I know that story?
Why was it so familiar...
Tomoya?
Oh, uh, sorry, I was
lost in thought.
@I was wondering if might
beúpeople in the Hidden World
@just like us, celebrating
New Year's right now.
I've been talking about
one Hidden World,
but there may be
any number of them.
In fact, there may be
as many worlds
as there are possibilities
in our lives.
Oh, that's funny. Fujibayashi,
you said something like that
a long time ago when you were
telling our fortunes, right?
Right. The future isn't
something that's predetermined,
there are all sorts of
possibilities out there.
I still in believe that.
Yeah, the possibilities
are endless!
That means there's a world
out there where one of you
is going out with me!
Or maybe a world where I'm
going out with ALL of you!
No Kyou in any world
would ever go out with you.
Well, no Sunohara would
ever go out with you!
It's no use. I can't create
things like she can.
The only thing I can do
is pile up junk.
No matter how hard I tried,
I was completely helpless.
Then... before I knew it...
I had stopped working.
So you're here too, huh?
Hey, Old man...
This town just keeps
changing and changing.
[Akio]: But what can I say?
Everything has to change sooner
or later.
That's how people keep
living... keep growing.
I'm surprised to
hear you say that;
I thought this place had
sentimental value to you.
Do you think... if we
stopped this construction,
Nagisa would get better?
Huh?
I dunno. I just
had that feeling.
You're being ridiculous.
Having a big hospital here
is good for the whole town...
it's nothing to complain about.
And even if we wanna
get sentimental about it,
it won't make any difference.
Yeah, I know. But I think I'm
gonna end up hating this town...
It ain't so bad.
If it makes you feel any better,
we asked the construction
company to keep
a couple of the trees around.
Just like Tomopyon, right?
At your high school?
Tomo-pyon? Oh, you mean Tomoyo.
So Nagisa's giving birth
at the hospital, huh?
Yeah. We just don't want
to take any chances.
It's safer that way.
Do everything you can and leave
the rest to fate... right?
Looks like it's gonna snow.
[Tomoya]: The snow came down in
sheets, covering the town.
Cars and trains
came to a standstill.
Everything stopped moving...
as if the town was paralyzed
from an illness.
Nagisa started running a fever,
then went into
labor unexpectedly.
It was two weeks earlier
than her due date.
@[Nagisa breathing in pain]
You're all right, Nagisa!
Hang in there, okay?
You're gonna make it!
Nagisa...!
Don't worry about me.
I'm fine. I have to
look out for Ushio.
@After this is over, the three
of us are gonna live together,
right here in our home.
All right, we were
able to get Yagi!
Damn it, the cars are
all stuck on the road!
What the hell?! Why now?!
Listen Furukawa, I need you
to boil some water for me.
As much as you can.
All right.
Okazaki... you do whatever
you can to encourage your wife.
All right, it's okay if
I hold her hand, isn't it?
Of course! You just hold on
and don't let go.
@Nagisa, I'm right here with
you, okay? Don't give up,
Nagisa!
[Tomoya]: I know you can do it.
It's gonna be fine!
You're gonna have Ushio
and we're gonna start
our new life together!
@Just calm down now,
úit'll be all right.
@[Yagi]ÚOkay. Breathe out.
@[Yagi]ÚThat's right,
@good. Now...
Just relax. Relax.
You're doing fine.
Let's have a look.
[Tomoya]: Nagisa lost
consciousness over and over
again.
Waking up and passing out
because of the pain.
It was cruel to watch. I wanted
to cover my eyes and hide.
It stretched on and on
with no end in sight.
I lost track of time...
it felt like an eternity.
I was so close to
passing out, myself.
After a while, I felt like my
heart couldn't take it anymore.
I felt like I had
run out of hope.
[baby crying]
Nagisa...?
Nagisa... [gasp]
Nagisa!
Tomoya...
She's here! Nagisa!
She's right here!
You can hear her, right?
That's our baby;
That's our baby crying!
Here, look! I got to hold her
before anyone else! See?
Yeah... She turned out so cute.
This is our little baby, Nagisa;
It's our little Ushio.
Hey there, 'Shio...
It's a girl! She's as
healthy as can be!
Yeah... I'm so glad I could
have her here at home
with you, Tomoya...
I'm sorry I had to make 'Shio
work so hard for it,
but at least we
were all together.
@You did a great job. I mean it.
Hey... I'm sorry, but I'm
starting to feel a little tired.
[Nagisa]: Could you let me rest?
Just for a second...
@[Sanae]ÚNagisa!
[Akio]: Damn it!
The doctor still isn't here?!
[Yagi]ÚWe still
can't use the car?!
@Nagisa... Wait,
Nagisa, not yet!
@Come on, let's talk j-just
a little longer, okay?
You don't have to say
anything, just listen.
C'mon, you have
to look at our baby!
She looks like a cuteúlittle
monkey, doesn't she?
See? She's so tiny!
Here, I'm gonna call
her name now... o-okay?
Ushio...
Hey, it's Daddy. Ushio?
This is mommy, see?
Look at her, see?
She's ignoring me.
[Tomoya]: Guess she
doesn't understand yet.
I bet she'll grow up
before we know it.
She'll be starting school...
We'll have to go clothes
shopping with her...
we'll have open house and
school festivals to go to...
We'll do it all as a family!
Even though... even though I
used to make fun of that stuff
when I was growing up.
Nagisa...?
[gasps]
Nagisa!
Here... it's Ushio's cheek.
Come on! Hey...
[Tomoya]: Nagisa... You told
me you'd always be by my side.
You said we'd always
be together...
You promised me that, remember?
Over and over again.
We both promised!
That was my only dream.
Nothing good ever happened
to me until I met you.
I thought I had a crappy life.
But even someone useless like me
finally found something
to live for.
Right, Nagisa? R-right...?
Nagisa...
Nagisa!
[Nagisa]:
Do you like this school?
I have to say that I love it
very, very much.
But soon everything changes,
well at least
it does eventually.
Fun things, happy things,
they'll all...
They'll all eventually change
someday you know.
But do you think you can still
love this place, anyway?
[Tomoya]:
We never should've met.
We should have just kept going
down our separate paths.
We never would've gone out.
We never would've
gotten married.
And... and Ushio never
would've been born.
Then... at least, I wouldn't
have to go through
so much suffering.
We never... should have met.